https://everycasualty.org/the-breakdown-of-casualty-recording-in-gaza-since-october-2023/

# The breakdown of casualty recording in Gaza since October 2023 - Every Casualty Counts

#### Professor Mike Spagat, Chair of Every Casualty Counts, explains how and why the casualty recording system in Gaza has deteriorated, and what we can still learn from the information available.

The system for recording casualties at the beginning of the most recent outbreak of violence, October 2023, was simple and transparent. It was based on recording bodies that passed through the hospital morgue system operated by the Ministry of Health (MoH). For each person killed, the MoH recorded the name, the age, the sex and a national ID number. The national ID number is particularly important because these ID numbers are assigned by the Israeli authorities, who maintain the Gazan population register. On October 26th the MoH released a list with nearly 7,000 names of people said to have been killed in the conflict. Using the ID numbers, the Israel government had the wherewithal to quickly check that list of names and make sure, at a minimum, that all the people on the list were real people.

The reliability of the initial casualty recording system in Gaza has been tested by independent third parties. The transparency organisation [Airwars](https://airwars.org/), which is a member of the ECC [Casualty Recorders Network](https://everycasualty.org/casualty-recorders-network/), has scoured news outlets and social media for reports of lethal incidents and checked whether named individuals killed in these incidents match names appearing on the October 26 MoH data release. On 24 July Airwars released a [major report](https://gaza-civilians.airwars.org/) on this research, finding that about 75% of the names they found on media/social media also appear on the October 26 list. This research provides good two-way validation of accuracy, both for the MoH system and for media/social media reporting in Gaza.

Public health researchers performed another [quality check](https://www.thelancet.com/journals/lancet/article/PIIS0140-6736(23)02713-7/fulltext) using data on Gaza-based UN workers killed in the war. They found that the fraction of all UN workers killed during the period covered by the October 26 MoH list is close to the number of people on the MoH list divided by the population of Gaza. One wouldn’t expect these two death rates to match up perfectly – there are reasons why UN workers are either more or less likely to be killed than random members of the Gaza population – but the compatibility of these two death rates does provide further quality assurance for this MoH list.

We should note that the MoH’s October 26 list does not give a *complete* record of every person killed during the opening period of the war, as there will certainly have been bodies that did not pass through a hospital morgue. However, this list is a high-quality record of *most *deaths during the first few weeks of the war.

As the conflict continued, however, the casualty recording system in Gaza became more complicated, and the quality decreased. In December, the MoH announced that because some of its hospitals had closed bodies were no longer consistently passing through the morgues, and so could not be recorded in the previous manner. The MoH recognised the detrimental impact this was having on the reliability of its casualty records.

The MoH said that it was trying to compensate for the diminished capacity of its hospital-morgue-based system by recording additional deaths identified through what it called *“reliable media sources”*. Media monitoring is a perfectly respectable way of monitoring recorded deaths in armed conflict. Lots of organisations [do this](https://www.iraqbodycount.org/about/) all around the world, but it’s not simple. It requires, for example, procedures for deciding whether two apparently similar events are the same or different incidents. You might get two reports with one saying that five people were killed in a bombing somewhere in north Gaza, and another saying that three people were killed in a bombing somewhere in north Gaza. Is this a single incident reported slightly differently? Or are these two separate incidents? In the present Gaza context, there is also the further challenge of deciding whether the deaths documented in these reports had also already been recorded through the hospital-based morgue system.

To assess the reliability of this revised system, we would need to know what methodology the MoH uses to record deaths from media sources. We also need to see a database containing these reported deaths and the sources that report them. Unfortunately, this information has not been made public.

The MoH introduced a second complication in its recording processes roughly simultaneously with the first one: people can now fill out a form to report a death directly. This new reporting channel extends the reach of the MoH casualty recording system, but it raises further issues about potential double counting. Deaths reported through the new form have been integrated with deaths reported through hospital morgues so, since December, the death totals divide into two components, one based on hospital morgues plus filled-out forms (component 1) and the other based on “*reliable media sources*” (component 2 ).

In short, the casualty recording system became more complicated and less transparent after the initial few weeks of the war. It is not necessarily unreliable, but it is less reliable than it was initially.

The MoH released follow up lists on [January 7 th](https://aoav.org.uk/2024/evaluation-of-war-related-deaths-in-gaza-discrepancies-and-data-quality-decline-after-october-26-evident/),

[March 31](https://aoav.org.uk/2024/analysis-of-new-death-data-from-gazas-health-ministry-reveals-several-concerns/),

st[April 30](https://aoav.org.uk/2024/gaza-ministry-of-health-releases-detailed-new-casualty-amidst-confusion-of-uns-death-numbers-in-gaza/), and

th[July 24th](https://t.me/MOHMediaGaza/5652). These were based on the merged hospital-morgue-and-form reporting channels. These lists have quality problems that were virtually non-existent in the October 26

threlease. For example, more than 1,000 deaths on the January 7

thlist are missing the deceased’s age even though they have national ID numbers, which should make it possible to find ages.

The March and April releases list many victims with invalid ID numbers. Palestinian ID numbers must have 9 digits, but many on the list have eight or ten digits. These are probably just typos, but more than 1,000 other listed ID numbers are completely invalid. They have 9 digits but do not match the national ID algorithm sequences of digits. Most of these invalid IDs begin with 8046, which could potentially be placeholder ID numbers for people for whom the MoH doesn’t have the correct number. We don’t know.

Evidently there are growing quality problems over time, and the political influence of Hamas on the MoH cannot be ignored, but we mustn’t lose sight of the big picture. Yes, there needs to be more work on the data but it is still a good, largely transparent system. All subsequent work on the death toll of the war will build on this foundation.

The Government Media Office (GMO) in Gaza is not part of the MoH. It is the media wing of Hamas, and its published casualty data should be treated with great scepticism. Since October, the GMO has claimed that 70% of the people killed in the war are women or children. This was close to being true at the beginning of war – the October 26th MoH data release put the woman-and-child percentage at about 64%. However, this percentage has dropped steadily over time, as I’ve chronicled in a [series of articles](https://pure.royalholloway.ac.uk/en/projects/the-death-toll-in-the-gaza-war), and this change has not been reflected in GMO statements.

Throughout the conflict UNOCHA has maintained an [information dashboard](https://www.ochaopt.org/) on fatalities. This is not based on their own direct research, but rather cites fatality information from other sources. Unfortunately, many of the figures cited came from the GMO and so cannot be assumed to be reliable.

In early May UNOCHA published two infographics two days apart that are fundamentally irreconcilable. [The first one](https://github.com/mspagat/Gaza-Death-Toll/blob/main/Gaza_casualties_info-graphic_6_May_2024.pdf) quoted woman-and-child fatality figures from the GMO citing the incorrect 70% figure. [The second release ](https://github.com/mspagat/Gaza-Death-Toll/blob/main/Gaza_casualties_info-graphic_8_May_2024.pdf)used MoH woman-and-child fatality figures from the MoH that added up to just over half the number published two days earlier.

A [media/social media firestorm](https://www.nbcnews.com/news/world/gaza-death-toll-ocha-un-confusion-anger-rcna151934) ensued during which the UN [denied](https://press.un.org/en/2024/db240513.doc.htm#:~:text=So%2C%20what%20they%20recently%20published,overall%20fatalities%20recorded%20in%20Gaza.) making an error and claimed that the two sets of figures were compatible with each other. The problem is that the first set of woman-and-child figures are based on total deaths while the second set are based on just the morgue-and-form-based component of total deaths. The division of MoH total deaths into a morgue-and-form-based component and a reliable-media-source-based component masks the inconsistency. So, we would expect the second set of figures to be lower than the first set – but not so much lower. Moreover, arithmetic reveals that even if deaths recorded by the MoH through its media-source-based component are included, they cannot make the two infographics match, even if 100% of the deaths recorded through this channel were women and children.

The UN created further confusion over the Gaza death numbers by referring to component 2 of the MoH’s casualty recording system as ‘records of unidentified bodies’, instead of “*reliable media sources*”. This makes little sense, not least because many of the victims listed in the MoH spreadsheets have no IDs or improper IDs and are, therefore, unidentified bodies.

Our understanding of the number of people killed in the conflict since October must begin with the system used by the MoH in the first four spreadsheets it released. These are based on the first component and are gold mines of information. Yes, these spreadsheets have numerous flaws that must be addressed, but they are the results of a serious and transparent casualty recording effort and they provide a credible rock bottom minimum for the number of Gazans killed in the war. For example, the [April 30 spreadsheet](https://aoav.org.uk/2024/gaza-ministry-of-health-releases-detailed-new-casualty-amidst-confusion-of-uns-death-numbers-in-gaza/) had 24,653 listed deaths (component 1) while the official MoH [total](https://www.reuters.com/world/middle-east/gaza-ministry-says-34535-palestinians-killed-israeli-strikes-since-oct-7-2024-04-30/#:~:text=CAIRO%2C%20April%2030%20(Reuters),and%20wounded%2061%2C%20it%20said.) on the same day was 34,535 (components 1 & 2). I consider that 24,653 is a reliable rock-bottom minimum as of April 30 whereas the roughly 10,000 additional deaths are, at best, very poorly documented although I do find this figure plausible.

Still, component 2 must be regarded as a black box. We don’t know what it is or how it works, so we can’t trust the figures produced through it. Similarly, the Israeli authorities have not provided any detailed data or explanations on casualty recording methodology. They have released numbers for fighters they claim to have killed, but they have not provided any detailed data or explained where these numbers come from. Therefore, these numbers are in the same class as category 2 of the MoH.

I would expect the final true number of people killed in the conflict to be in line with the figures being cited by the MoH, plus or minus 5,000 deaths. I dispute the argument in [the letter that was published recently in the Lancet claiming that there have been, or will be, tens of thousands of non-violent deaths](https://aoav.org.uk/2024/a-critical-analysis-of-the-lancets-letter-counting-the-dead-in-gaza-difficult-but-essential-professor-mike-spagat-reviews-the-claim-the-total-gaza-death-toll-may-reach-upwards-of-186000/) indirectly caused by the violence of the war. I believe this claim is unfounded.

The most [interesting pattern](https://aoav.org.uk/2024/has-international-legal-challenge-changed-the-patterns-of-death-in-the-gaza-war/) in casualty information in Gaza is the sharp drop in the percentages of women and children over time. It was exceptionally high at the beginning, nearly equal to the percentage of women and children within the population as a whole. In other words, during the first few weeks of the war, which is by far the most violent period, the composition of the victims in Gaza looks almost like a random draw from the population. The killing at that stage was quite indiscriminate. Later, the percentages of women and children decreased substantially. The data isn’t good enough to date the changes precisely, but it is clear enough that the transition began around January of 2024.

A second pattern is that conflict intensity was very high during the first three weeks of the war, nearly 400 deaths per day, and then dropped down to roughly 100 deaths per day (with a lot of variation around that central figure).

It’s interesting to speculate on the reasons for these patterns. A transition from near-exclusive use of aerial bombing by the Israeli Defence Forces (IDF) to a combination of aerial bombing and bullets as the ground invasion began is likely to be part of the explanation. Deaths by shooting in [other wars](https://www.nejm.org/doi/full/10.1056/NEJMp0807240) have tended to focus mainly on adult males – even very ruthless combatants seem to shy away from killing women and children. Another factor might be South Africa’s genocide case against Israel that was opened at the International Court of Justice in December. This, and other pressure from the international community might have prompted a change in IDF tactics.

*Based on an interview with Prof. Spagat by Hazel Stutz*
